\input texinfo   @c -*- Texinfo -*-
@setfilename pctpaper.info
@settitle Cryptography and Python
@titlepage
@title Cryptography and Python
@author by A.M. Kuchling
@page
@end titlepage

Python is one of those languages that fills many roles.  It can be used
for prototyping, for writing actual production code, as an interface
between software components, or as a handy tool for easily writing quick
scripts.  For many of these purposes, cryptography can be a useful
capability.  Some relevant modules come with the standard Python
distribution; there's already a module supporting the MD5 hash
algorithm, and there's a demo implementing the RSA public key system.
However, the core distribution can't support everything, or it would
have to come on its own CD-ROM.  The Python Cryptography Toolkit is a
collection of extension modules for Python.  One part of the Toolkit is
a number of different algorithms.  The list includes most of the common
ones:

@itemize @bullet
@item        Encryption algorithms: Alleged RC4, Blowfish, DES, Diamond,
IDEA, LOKI91, RC5, REDOC III, Sapphire.
@item        Hash algorithms: MD2, MD4, MD5, Secure Hash Algorithm.
@item        Public key algorithms: ElGamal, RSA, Digital Signature Algorithm.
@end itemize

An important design criterion was that, assuming the Python code to be
carefully written, it should be trivial to replace one algorithm with
another.  To this end, modules that implement a particular class of
algorithm share identical interfaces, and variables parameterizing the
module's characteristics are available to help in programming portably.

Encryption algorithms transform their input data (called
@dfn{plaintext}) in some way that is
dependent on a variable @dfn{key}, producing @dfn{ciphertext};
this transformation can easily be reversed, if (and, hopefully, only
if) one knows the key.  The key can be varied by the user or
application, chosen from some very large space of possible keys. 

For block private-key encryption, the @code{new()} function is called
with the key and an encryption mode parameter.  Block algorithms operate
on fixed chunks of plaintext, usually 8 or 16 bytes.  In Electronic
Codebook (ECB) mode, each block is encrypted independently of each
other.  This is the fastest mode, but long strings of repeated
characters in the plaintext encrypt to repeating blocks, which may be
helpful to an adversary.  In the Cipher Block Chaining (CBC) and Cipher
Feedback (CFB) modes, plaintext is XORed with the previous ciphertext;
this breaks up any such repeating patterns.

As an example, let us encrypt a horrifying message:
@example
@cartouche
>>> import des
>>> obj=des.new('abcdefgh', des.ECB)
>>> plain="Guido van Rossum is a space alien."
>>> len(plain)
34
>>> obj.encrypt(plain)
Traceback (innermost last):
  File "<stdin>", line 1, in ?
ValueError: Strings for DES must be a multiple of 8 in length
>>> ciph=obj.encrypt(plain+'XXXXXX')
>>> ciph
'\021,\343Nq\214DY\337T\342pA\372\255\311s\210\363,\300j\330\250\312\347\342I\3215w\03561\303dgb/\006'
>>> obj.decrypt(ciph)
'Guido van Rossum is a space alien.XXXXXX'
@end cartouche
@end example

Hash functions produce short "fingerprints" of arbitrary data.  Unlike
simple checksums, it is very difficult to find two messages that produce
the same hash value, or to modify a message without changing the
resulting hash value.  Hash functions can be used as checksums, or as
part of a digital signature system.

@example
@cartouche
>>> import md5
>>> obj=md5.new()
>>> obj.digest()
'\324\035\214\331\217\000\262\004\351\200\011\230\354\370B~'
>>> obj.update("This is a test message for a hashing function.")
>>> obj.digest()
'F\315\344~\032\234\227\2627\276\366d\255\262%r'
>>> obj.update('\000')
>>> obj.digest()
'\222?:\262g\252\255\023?w\314\305~\374=6'
@end cartouche
@end example

Public-key cryptography uses two keys; one encrypts, one decrypts.  The
public key encrypts data, producing ciphertext that can only be
decrypted by the private key, which is only known to the legitimate
owner (we hope).  The public key can then be listed in a directory or
handed out to correspondents, who can then send the owner secure
messages without having to arrange a key beforehand.  Also, digital
signatures can be created by decrypting data with the private key;
anyone can then encrypt the data with the corresponding public key and
verify that the signature and the message match. 
The PCT allows the use of various public-key systems.

As an example, let us generate an RSA private key to sign a text string
@code{plaintext}.  (Actually, we will sign a hash of the plaintext.)
@code{randfunc()} is a random number generation function (not shown) 
that accepts a single integer parameter @var{N}, and returns an
@var{N}-byte string of random data; it's used in generating the prime
numbers required for an RSA key.  A class for cryptographically strong
random number generation is provided with the Toolkit, or you can
implement your own technique.

@example
@cartouche
>>> import md5, RSA
>>> RSAkey=RSA.generate(384, randfunc)   # This will take a while...
>>> hash=md5.new(plaintext).digest()
>>> signature=RSAkey.sign(hash, "")
>>> signature   # Print what an RSA sig looks like--you don't really care.
('\021\317\313\336\264\315' ...,)
>>> RSAkey.validate(hash, signature)     # This sig will check out
1
>>> RSAkey.validate(hash[:-1], signature)# This sig will fail
0
@end cartouche
@end example

Change @code{md5} to @code{SHA} or @code{MD4}, and everything will work
identically.  

The PGP module is only partially implemented; currently, public or
private PGP keys can read from a file or a string, and be written out
again.  Message support is not yet implemented, but the module is useful
for manipulating keyrings; for example, a simple script to
alphabetically sort PGP keyrings by user ID is included with the
Toolkit.

@section Future plans

In future, adding algorithms will be of less importance in development.
There are two classes of cryptographic algorithms: the innumerable ones
that are proposed, and the few ones that are actually used.  New
algorithms are constantly being invented, but relatively few of them
become part of the security engineer's toolchest, and there's no point
in trying to implement every single one of them.  There are a few that
should still be implemented: the only one remaining on my list at this
point is the Haval hashing algorithm.

Afterwards, I will change my focus to optimizing and clarifying the
existing C and Python code, and implementing some interesting protocols.
There are many protocols that could be chosen.  As the use of the
Internet for commercial purposes spreads, network security becomes more
important as more and more financial data and proprietary information is
transmitted across the network.  There is no single standard for secure
Internet communications yet.  Instead, there are various standards being
proposed, and it is probably best that Python be able to use them all.
I am not currently planning to work on any of the following, though I'd
certainly be willing to provide assistance.

@itemize @bullet
@item Kerberos: Kerberos is an identification and
authentication protocol developed at MIT and described in RFC 1510,
designed to operate in an environment of insecure individual
workstations and a few trusted servers.  The Kerberos protocol is fairly
complex and specialized, so it may not be worth the effort of actually
implementing the RFC in Python.  Rather, it would be much simpler to
write a wrapper module around the appropriate library routines for
Kerberos version 4 or 5.

@item Netscape's Secure Socket Layer: After glancing at the
specification, SSL doesn't seem to be too difficult to implement.
However, a complete implementation is probably impossible, because  it
uses the RC2 encryption algorithm, which is proprietary to RSA Data
Security, Inc., and has not been publicly described.  Thus, any Python
implementation will not be able to fully interoperate with official
implementations.

@item Secure HTTP: SHTTP is yet another proposed standard, that allows
more freedom in the algorithms used.  Version 1.1 of the specification
is available at http://www.eit.com/projects/s-http/shttp.txt, and has
been submitted as an Internet draft.  Because of SHTTP's more open
and flexible nature, I'd prefer that it be implemented first.  Why
contribute to making SSL a de facto standard when we'll probably never
be able to fully implement it?
@end itemize

There are also Python-specific applications for cryptography.  One of
the demo scripts included with the Toolkit implements a crude version of
a secure import statement.  Armed with a public key and a list of
signatures (which are assumed to be magically available and known to be
correct), any compiled module is run through a hash function before
being imported.  The hash value is then checked against the
corresponding signature; if it fails, an ImportError exception is
raised.  This has obvious relevance to implementing distributed systems
and agents in Python.

The next release of the Toolkit is 0.0.3, and includes the Digital
Signature Algorithm and improved documentation.
Hopefully, the encumbered modules will be reimplemented and optimized as
well.  I will also tackle implementing the issues on my wish list, which
leads naturally to...

@section My wish list

There are some enhancements to Python that would improve the Toolkit by
making it simpler or faster.  

@itemize @bullet
@item The @code{struct} module does not yet allow specifying the byte
order, nor does it support character arrays, C strings, or converting a
string to a Python long integer.  This would really speed up the PGP
module, and might make it almost as fast as PGP itself, which is written
purely in C.
@item Your integer arithmetic routines can never be too fast.  Python's
long integers are reasonably speedy, but I intend to benchmark various 
arbitrary-precision integer libraries, and see which comes out on top.
@end itemize
@bye


