'	# -*- nroff -*-
.TH DES 1 "March 9, 1989"
.GN 2
.SH NAME
des \- encrypt and decrypt using DES algorithm
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B des
[
.B -k
.I keystring
] [
.B -e
] [
.B -d
] [
.B -x
] [
.B -X
] [
.B -S
] [
.B -c
.I count
] [
.B -p
] [
.I inputfile
[
.I outputfile
] ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Des
reads
.I inputfile
and writes the en/decrypted data to
.I outputfile\c
\&.
If file name is not given in command line, des uses standard input or output.
The
.I keystring
is transformed by a one-way funtion into a 8-byte key,
which is then used by the algorithm. If no
.I keystring
is given on command line,
des asks one with getpass(3).
.PP
Des encrypts when given
.B -e
flag and decrypts with
.B -d\c
\&.
With
.B -x
flag des encrypts normally, but it doesn't produce any encrypted
output, instead it prints 8-byte cryptographic checksum of input data.
The checksum is printed to standard output file.
This checksum can be used to verify whether the input data has been modified.
It is computationally hard to change the input data in such a way that
the checksum wouldn't change.
.B -X
is similar to
.B -x
but it prints the input data to output file unchanged and prints the
checksum to standard error file.
Using this feature you can for example produce a compressed tar archive
and its checksum
at the same time with command:
.PP
(tar cf - dir | des -X | compress > dir.tar.Z) >& dir.cksum
.PP
With
.B -c
des makes encryption
.I count
times for each 8kbyte block.
This possibly makes the encrypted data harder to break.
.PP
By default, des encrypts the data using cipher block chaining (CBC) mode.
With
.B -p
flag, des uses
PCBC mode, which makes it possible to detect if the data have been tampered
after encryption.
.PP
.B -S
flag enables SUN compatiblity mode. In this mode des is compatible
with the des program distributed with SUNOS in United States. In SUN mode
des uses user supplied keyword without hashing it. This means that only first
eight characters of the key are used. SUN mode should be used only for
compatibility reasons. -b flag (ECB mode) of SUN des is not supported.
.SH FILES
/dev/tty is used to read a keystring by getpass(3)
.SH AUTHOR
Antti Louko (alo@kampi.hut.fi), Helsinki University of Technology
Computing Centre
.SH BUGS
This program is at most as strong as DES algorithm itself.
So, we urge the user to use this program only after he has assured
himself that DES is strong enough AND he has read the source code of this
program and its libraries AND he has compiled the program himself with a
trojan-free compiler. I DON'T GUARANTEE THAT THIS PROGRAM IS A DECENT
ENCRYPTION PROGRAM.
