.TH DESTEST 1 "Version 1.0" "Chalmers University"
.SH NAME
destest \- Simple test program for DES functions.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B destest
[
.B \-h
]
.I key
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
.I destest
makes a simple test of the
.IR des_dea (3)
and
.IR des_key (3)
algorithms.
.PP
The following options are available:
.TP
.B \-h
makes 
.I destest
treat the key is an ascii string of hexadecimal number representing
the actual DES key. The key may have an optional
.B 0x
or
.B 0X
prepended.
.PP
If the
.B \-h
flag is omitted,
.I key
is converted to a DES key by using
.IR des_string_to_key (3).
.PP
The program is useful to test that new modifications do not break the
algorithm. This program does NOT certify that the implementation conforms to
the DES standard.
.PP
The output from the program shows the following information.
.TP
1
The input key.
.TP
2
The generated 64-bit DES key.
.TP
3
The key parity.
.TP
4
Number of different generated key schedules.
.TP
5
The key schedules 1..16.
.TP
6
An iteration of all 64-bits showing the input data, encrypted data and
decrypted data. The first iteration is on the first bit of the 64-bit block,
the second on the second bit, and so on.
.SH SEE ALSO
.IR des (3).
.SH AUTHOR
.ie t .ds O: \\kz\\h'+(\w'O'-\w'..')/2'\v'-0.8m'..\v'+0.8m'\\h'|\\nzu'O
.el .ds O: O
Stig \*(O:stholm <ostholm@ce.chalmers.se>
.br
Department of Computer Engineering
.br
Chalmers University of Technology
.SH RESTRICTIONS
This software may be freely distributed an modified without any restrictions
from the author.
Additional restrictions due to national laws governing the use, import or
export of cryptographic software is the responsibility of the software user,
importer or exporter to follow.
